:sparkles: summarize best practices for data science session (#2)
biosustain/dsp_notes: python/best_practices.md

# Coding (best) practices for Data Science

> Author: Henry Webel

> Being asked to show some coding best practices for an internal retreat, I assembeled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Being asked to show some coding best practices for an internal retreat, I assembled
```

> some low hanging fruits in reach for everyone and some pratices I learned to appreciate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some low hanging fruits in reach for everyone and some practices I learned to appreciate.
```

> ## Use a formater

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use a formatter
```

> When you write code, you should at least use some sort of formatter. `black` is common choice

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you write code, I encourage using a formatter. `black` is a common choice
```

as it allows you to format code in a user-defined linelength consistently. It even can

> break too long strings into it's parts - leaving only long comments and docstrings to you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
break too long strings into its parts - leaving only long comments and docstrings to you
```

for adoption.

> `black` or `autopep8` are also availbe next to `isort` for sorting imports in VSCode as 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`black` or `autopep8` are also available next to `isort` for sorting imports in VSCode as 
```

extension, so your files are formatted everytime you save these 
([link](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/formatting)).

## Use a linter

Too long lines, unpassed arguments or mutable objects as default function parameters you can

> identify using a linter like `flake8` or `ruff`. Tools like 

Reviewer: I would invert the two sentences: Using a linter blabla helps you identifying blabla

[`Pylint` in VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/python/linting)

> allow you to get in editor highlighting of Code issues and links with hints on how to fix them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allow your code editor to highlight issues and links with hints on how to fix them
```

![screenshot with typehints](assets/lint_pylance_in_vscode.png)

> Example: Using the linter you can for example if you did not pass an argument to a function

Reviewer: There is a word or two missing here. And repetition of "example".

[Better Comments](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=aaron-bond.better-comments)
allows you to highlight comments in code using different colors 
`# ? warning` or `# ? question` or `# TODO` . If you add `?` and `!` to the list of expression to list
in a
[ToDo Tree](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Gruntfuggly.todo-tree) 
you can easily keep a list of todos in your code - allowing you to go 
through them from time to time and prioritze.

![Highlighted Comments and ToDo Tree example](assets/better_comments_todo_tree.png)

## Text based Notebook (percent format) with jupytext and papermill

[`jupytext`](https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/) is a lightweight tool to keep scripts either as notebooks (`.ipynb`) or simpler text based file formats, such as markdown files (`.md`)  which can be easily rendered on GitHub or python files  (`.py`) which can be executed in VSCode’s interactive shell and are better for version control. Some tools still need ipynb to work, e.g. `papermill`. Therefore it is handy to keep different version of a script in sync. Otherwise one can also only use python files and render these as notebook in e.g. 

> [jupyter lab](https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/text-notebooks.html). Especially if the code is only kept for version control, but executed versions are keep in a project folder using a workflow environment (as `snakemake` or `nextflow`) this comes in handy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[jupyter lab](https://jupytext.readthedocs.io/en/latest/text-notebooks.html). This is useful especially if the code is only kept for version control, but executed versions are kept in a project folder using a workflow environment (as `snakemake` or `nextflow`).
```

You can see an example of the percent notebook in the [percent_notebooks](project:percent_notebooks.py) section.

I showed how to sync a text based percent notebook and execute it using `papermill`
(without) specifying arguments on the commmand line:

```bash
jupytext --to ipynb -k - -o - example_nb.py | papermill - path/to/executed_example.ipynb
```

If you want to keep some formats in sync and only sync one of these and only push one type to git 
- specifying e.g. a `.gitignore` the types you want to only have locally.
Each folder can have a `.jupytext.toml` file to specify the formats you want to keep in sync
in that folder e.g.:

```toml 
# percent format and ipynb format in sync
formats = "ipynb,py:percent"
```

## Copilot in VSCode

Ghosttext, chats and inline chats are great ways to get suggestions on the code you are 
writing. You can apply for a free version as a [(PhD) student](https://github.com/education/students)

> or [instructor](https://github.com/education/teachers). Currently alternatives wit a free-tier as [codium](https://codeium.com/) are also available.

Reviewer 2: *with
